---
title: 3D Printing Applications in Humanities Education
author: Damian Chavez
layout: base
date: 2026-05-20
summary: We will be discussing not just how 3D printing and VR technologies can be used for teaching humanities subjects, but also how much is already being done with them in the hands of real people!
header-title: 3D Printing today
header-eyebrow: Let us begin
header-divider: ✦ ✦ ✦
header-position: 0px
autoscroll: false
tags:
  - History, Science 
---

  This essay demonstrates the complex relationships between emerging technologies and the methods by which we teach subjects as well as how we can preserve and digitize physical materials to make them not just accessible to more people but have accurate simulations or facsimiles made of them for the purposes of hands-on historical education.
                               
                               
                               State of 3D scanning and printing in Humanities Study
At the beginning of this, around February 2026, I had begun collecting the thoughts that would have become the original idea for my personal research project. Over time, it would be reshaped as a result of the research done over the course of the semester. The original idea for this was to collect and document various uses that 3D printing and 3D scanning technologies have had in the view of humanities study. For the purposes of this purpose, I focused on both historical and anthropological use cases for these technologies. But in my research process, I found only roadblocks at every turn under those parameters. I did find various isolated occurrences of these technologies being used, but there wasn't a common thread amongst them, at least not one that I found worth following or diving into deeper. With this in mind, I needed a change, and it took me far longer than it probably should have to find the lens by which I am writing this piece now. With this extremely scarce evidence, I changed the paradigm on my goals. I changed to how come these technologies aren't being used more. Taking the environments that allowed them to be used from the existing research, I continued down the rabbit hole of the limitations of these technologies, what situations allow and halt their use or application, and why aren't institutions making them the standard for education or facsimile making for the purposes of historical preservation, imitation recreation, and most importantly, education?

During the research process, I found an increasing number of roadblocks and dead ends at every lead. Every instance I came across was hyper-specialized to a specific situation and not built upon a standard structure of practice by any means. To me, this reflects how institutions look at these technologies as more of a single-use, hyper-specific use and not the prevailing standard, like I think it could be. But what also comes about during each use case, I've found, is that it requires the onboarding of specialists in their use of them and not an in-house knower of them. Like every new age of technologies, these long-held traditions or institutions driven by elders tend to be extremely slow on the uptake of new practices, even if they prove more fruitful than the standing practice. The fact that in my research, findings documented use cases for these technologies shows just how infantile it is in this environment. While among engineering and architecture students, 3D printing and making models of their own constructions for proofs of concept, as well as applicable stress testing, is a normalized and accepted practice. I think there's room, especially in the spectrum of education and in archeological practice, to use these technologies to make holdable facsimiles of material cultures. Everything from native american potteries all the way to medieval European armors and arts. As time goes on, the level of quality and color accuracy grows as more detailed printers and new 3D rigging applications become available. So, I don't think the lack of sources I've found comes from an illogical thought process or use case for that matter, but more from a world of underutilization and underpracticed technologies, especially among humanities departments and museum curations.

With this in mind lets get into the research itself. The documented use cases I've been able to acquire come from so many vastly different institutions and specifics. With this in mind, all of them document a successful completion of the task through the technologies used for the specific purposes. The one I'm going to focus on the most is called “The Digital Michelangelo Project.” Over the course of the 1998 -1999 academic year, students of Stamford University and the University of Washington, in partnership with professors and financial sponsors, made extremely accurate and detailed 3D surface renders of many historical sculptures and art pieces. The goal of these renders was not to make merchandise or something to be sold; it was strictly academic and scholarly During that time, they scanned the David, the Unfinished Slaves (Atlas, Awakening, Bearded, and Youthful), the St. Matthew, the four allegorical statues from the Medici Tombs (Night, Day, Dawn, and Dusk), the architectural interior of the Tribune del David in the Galleria dell'Accademia, and the architectural interior of Michelangelo's New Sacristy in the Medici Chapels, with extreme accuracy and procession. 

These renders paved the way for accessibility to view these historical marvels across oceans, across time, and, more importantly, despite physical boundaries. I think that practices like these should become the standard of museum curation, that all artifacts (with permission of indigenous bodies and humanely sourced artifacts) should be 3d scanned, digitized, and made available through academic research portals and even digital online museums where people with physical disabilities can still view and marvel at what history has to show. And I think that if this were to become the standard that museums would digitize their entire collections this way, it would be a huge step in academic interaction with material cultures and artifacts, and it would make more transparent what these museums actually have in their collections. This is an entirely different topic that one could spend an entire lifetime pursuing, but this would also make proper repatriation more possible for collections that have artifacts collected through dubious methods at best, tho american is the soul country worried about artifact repatriation.

The technology itself is only growing in prevalence, both in the industrial and civil sectors of practice. Through digital creation technology, one could practice making anything and have a 3d printer make it with size, weight, and material accounted for in the system. Many engineers use it for all matters of tasks, big and small. In the civil area, one can find thousands of genuinely progressive use cases. On YouTube, content creators use these technologies to solve problems both self-made and practical. There's one content creator who went viral for the use of 3D printing to make a functional prosthesis for his daily life, being able to defy the physical limited posed apon him by forces out of his control. The flexibility and diversity these technologies have created should not go unrecognized. And while I believe these things have made massive strides, I believe also that there is still so much more that is going to come about from these formats in the next 5 to 10 years, if not into the next 20 years. and I think that humanities institutions need to start getting on board with this wave before they get lost in the tides because this could very well be the medium that makes anthropological study material and culture and human history not just a lecture based digital learning system but a physical hand held hands on learning format letting students not just hear about artifacts but hold them manipulate them and feel what was made soo many years ago. It would allow those with different impairments to view the world, hidden from them; the blind could feel the history, digital and physical accessibility in a medium never before seen, and a level of availability never before seen.

Most institutions haven't bothered to invest money or even time into the prolonged introduction of these technologies into the standard practice of curation. Even tho the use cases I have found show a history of largely successful historical preservation and classification. I find that money and education come up at every turn, the major hurdles that are faced by these systems and their possible introduction are diverse but not insurmountable. Largely, the issues posed against the adoption of these technologies come down to time, effort, and cost vs perceived rewards. There is a long-standing correlation between hands-on education systems and academic performance in public school students in America. As well as, often younger generations adapt to these technologies outside of academic structures anyway. Meaning if you give teachers and institutions a crash course on how these technologies work, the actual hands-on applications can be a collaborative effort between students and faculty. It would change the face of what a school project could be and give more breath to the efforts students put in, as well as bring something physical into the space, an item or collection of items that don't just tell the story of the group that made them, but also the academic efforts of the students who had them printed for one reason or another. Many institutions have already run the risk vs reward management when introducing these technologies, and often find the problems are rather solvable with some simple communication and collaboration. It promotes a growth mindset in students as well as gives them more freedom to pursue personal interests through an academic lens.

The diversity of things that can be chronicled this way is limitless. From native american and native african stone tool industries, to metal blades of war and armor to withstand them in the premodern period era, Medieval accounts of plagues and disease through 3d redured medicine jars, the ships of colonization scaled down and holdible as models, to the framework of modern war. Nuclear science well displayed in artifact forms. Recreations of objects of folklore and mythos, the staff or hermes. The ornate mirror of Amaterasu, these recreations would make all matters of history perceived and accounted for in the endless pursuit of preservation. Soo long as it has a physical remnant, it can be preserved through this method, and even things with only written accounts can have rendered interpretations made for the purposes of education. The prospects of vr technology only further enlighten this, being able to create digital museums for those with physical disabilities to be able to experience. And even recreate historical events and experiences with true occurrence events like the sinking of the RMS Titanic, the HMHS Britannic, and the RMS Lusitania are already experiences one can have in VR to both understand the intensity and the true scale of these tragic events. We are reaching a crux where history is something that doesn't always need to be explained anymore; it can truly be relived and experienced 

More importantly than anything, these technologies are becoming more standard across industries all around the world, and the diverse and complex applications make them even more intriguing. Introducing them early to students would give them that much more use in whatever fields or lines of work they grow up into. There's no reason why humanities studies and education need to stay archaic in their teaching styles. All it takes is one introduction across the board, and it will stick around forever, growing and developing dynamically with people and time. Everything from facsimile making for educational or display purposes all the way to architectural stability testing, to medical and synthetic body repair and augmentation. These are all cases that have already established a basis of success and are only growing more successful and complex with time. 

In conclusion, the humanities education and museum studies have a lot to gain from joining what is already in motion with these modern technologies. The ability to make material culture and the history they carry not just accessible to everyone physically or digitally, but also immortalize the stories they tell for myriad human lifetimes, so that anyone who desires to know can simply acquire and access. As the technology grows in complexity, so does the detail in artifacts it can capture and the thousands of years of human history that can be preserved, retold, and held in the hands of people generationally. There would be a growing pain period of introduction for most places, especially as they learn and test the boundaries of what can be done with them. But it's that test failure and growth that drives creativity, innovation, and perseverance. A true non-destructive method to immortalize history in collections, physical and digital information networks. As well as accurate and honest portrayals of history as it was.